[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Today we're looking
at the placebo.
Can we use this power
for other purposes?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So what exactly is
the placebo effect?
If you look back into some
of the ancient writings,
let's say the Bible, you'll
see this word placebo comes up
in Latin.
In Psalms chapter
114, verse 9, it
says "placebo Domino in
regione vivorum," which means,
"I shall please the Lord
in the land of the living."
So placebo literally
means I shall please.
Well, that's the ancient world.
When did the modern
Western world get hip
to the placebo response?
It all started with an
English physician named
William Cullen in the 1700s.
He gave fake, or sham,
pills to his patients
when he had no
other pills to give.
But the peculiar
thing is he started
to notice that
these pills worked
because the people believed they
were getting actual medicine.
The placebo is driven by
our belief, by our ideas,
meaning it is
malleable and we can
change its meaning,
its effect in our body,
simply with the mind.
Let's take a deeper look
at the placebo effect.
In an episode of
Inspirations with Lisa
Garr called "Rewriting
the Genetic Code"
with Dr. Mario Martinez.
>>DR. MARIO MARTINEZ:
For example, we
know that they're
spontaneous healings.
A person believes
something and they actually
are allowed to heal themselves.
I'll give an example.
There was a reported in
one of psychiatric journals
in a Catholic
hospital, the priest
came into the room
for this patient
to give them the last rites.
He gave him the last rites
and he died in 15 minutes.
The problem is that he
went to the wrong room.
So what happened is that,
in this person's mind,
two authorities in a context,
a doctor and a priest,
are telling me that I'm not
going to be around anymore.
They have that nocebo effect
and when you do an autopsy,
there's nothing wrong
except some kind
of parasympathetic
stopping of the heart.
But now the person who
was scheduled to die
waited two days for the
priest to come before he died.
So the mind can
wound and can heal,
based on the belief
systems that we have.
>>LISA GARR: Wow.
So you can really
change, I mean,
the power of changing
your belief system.
And you said to me look
for the signals of health.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>GARR: Not for the
signals of sickness.
>>MARTINEZ: Exactly.
>> In the 1960s, researchers
were actually trying
to differentiate that
terminology from the placebo
effect into the placebo response
because effect seems like
there's just this objective
thing that happens once you
take a pill, but a response is
something that we engage with,
meaning we are responding to
what we believe we are taking
in.
So there's a very
unique difference.
It's not about the
object of world.
It's about the subject
of beliefs of those
who are taking the pill.
I found this article with
the title, "Why don't we
Exploit the Hell out
of the Placebo effect?"
And there's this awesome
little part in there
where they say it's
counterintuitive, mindbending,
and rather uncomfortable fact
that placebo pills produce
about 60% to 80% of
the benefit of the best
medications for diseases
with subjective symptoms."
60% to 80% as effective as the
pharmaceuticals on the market.
That's the power of our belief.
So what if we could
turn this into a skill?
What if we were able to take
this malleable, mind-driven
placebo response and turn
it into the direction
that we choose?
Is that possible?
Is that a skill
that we can develop?
Well, let's take a
look back at the body.
We've said in this series
before that the body is not
as old as you are, it's
as old as creation.
It goes back, our
genetics, go back
to the beginning
of our family line.
All that information that it
had there to begin with probably
came from, let's say, all
the way back to the Big Bang.
So what this is saying to me
is we become what we focus on.
If we were to actually able
to use this skill, to heal
from a disease by
changing the chemistry,
stopping all of those
initiators, those things that
prompt illness
inside the body, then
from the outside perspective,
it would seem that all we did
was miraculously heal ourselves.
There are many people out there
that don't believe anything
beyond what the science
is already showing us
and because of this-- this
is a very good quality--
but when it's taken too
far, or out of balance,
then anything that we can't
explain is simply magic.
It's left for Hollywood.
Don't believe in
it, it's not real.
Stick with the science.
Well, this seems like it
saying just the opposite.
What we believe, even if it
hasn't been proven by science
yet, might still be
possible because we
can restructure our
brain and change
the chemistry of our
body and heal ourselves
from the inside out, without
outer or any kind of medicine,
simply with the mind.
So let's take that
word magic because it's
thrown around a lot, mainly
in Hollywood, and also
magic tricks, illusions,
tricking people with sleight
of hand, getting you
to look over here
while the real thing
is happening over here.
It's just a trick.
It's not real.
But ancient forms
of magic, and even
practical forms of modern
magic, are really nothing more
than a higher science.
What would magic truly be
other than finding a clever way
to use the natural forces
that are all around us
to effect the response
that we would like.
Well, let's take a
look at what Arthur C.
Clarke has to say about magic.
He said, "Any sufficiently
advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic."
What if this is true?
What if our wildest
imaginations are within reach?
What if things that we
thought were completely left
for Hollywood movies are
well within our reach, simply
because, once we understand
that they are natural forces,
there is a science
behind them, a science
that albeit maybe modern
researchers have not
figured out yet but a science
all the same, it's real,
it's tangible.
So what if all that we call
magic, what if it is possible?
Can we use the artist
mind, our creativity,
our ability to
take abstract ideas
and bring them down here into
this three dimensional world,
anchor them into real life?
Let's take a look at how Barbara
Marx Hubbard met her husband.
She tells the story beautifully
on an episode of Inspirations
with Lisa Garr called
"Co-Creating Change."
>>BARBARA MARX HUBBARD: I
went to Paris my junior year.
I met my husband in a
little cafe on the left bank
and I asked him my question.
What's the meaning
of our new power?
What do you think it is?
And he said I'm
an artist and I'm
seeking a new
story, a new image,
commensurate with our power.
And I thought, I'm
going to marry you.
And I did.
>>LISA GARR: And you did.
>>HUBBARD: I got
married on the quest
for what is the story,
what is the direction,
and how are we going to find it?
And I realized, in a way, it's
an art form because it's not
written down somewhere.
We have to seek it out.
>> So thank you, Barbara, very
beautiful words and also very
telling that when we set out
to solve some kind of riddle,
when we set out with an idea
in mind and we wish to bring
something abstract into clear
visibility, into this world,
we are figuring
ourselves out bit by bit,
discovering what
we are capable of.
What we should truly
be asking ourselves
is what else can we put this
placebo response in service to?
How else can we use it?
Can we merge the artist's mind
with the placebo response?
I believe we can.
Take a listen to
Corinne Garstin.
She says, "I think
everything in life
is art, what you do,
how you dress, the way
you love someone, your
smile and your personality,
what you believe in and
all your dreams, the way
you drink your tea, how
you decorate your home
or party, your grocery list,
the food you make, and the way
you feel."
And she ends by saying,
"Life itself is art."
Remember that there are a
myriad amount of choices
that we can set off on,
paths that we can go down
in our lives.
But if we realize that we
are that decision maker,
we decide what
direction we go in.
We decide whether we
just rest on our laurels,
sit around, and not
work on our potential
or if we set off down that
mysterious road of unlocking
our hidden potential.
We have this power.
I believe that humanity
is really nothing more
than immature magicians.
That's not an insult.
What that's saying
is we have so much power and
we have yet to tap into it.
That's why I implore you
to set off down this path
with the right tools,
remembering this whole thing
about community and
society and what
we can do with our power
is not just about us.
It's about serving
the greater world.
Here's a quote from
Michael Josephson
saying, "Your life is your
ship and you are the captain.
Choose your course,
take the wheel firmly,
and get on your way."
Yes there are some
unforeseen circumstances.
There are always
going to be things
that you could not
conceive of as you're
walking this path of life
towards our human potential,
but this should not deter us.
We should still take
the wheel firmly
and get on our way
to discovering who
and what we truly are.
And if we do this,
we will realize
that it's not just about us.
There are others on
this road with us.
There's a whole community.
Who are these others?
Captain D. Michael
Abrashoff said, "Be there
for your people.
Find out who they are, recognize
the effects you have on them,
and how you can make
them grow taller."
Now let's take a look
at the placebo response
on a national or global
level by watching
a little bit of this film, "Art
Meets Science and Spirituality
in a Changing Economy."
>> Well, you see, I think
the difficulty is this
fragmentation, first of all.
All thought is
broken up into bits,
like this nation, this country,
this industry, this profession,
and so on as they can't
meet and it's extremely hard
to break into that.
Now, there's the second one
but that comes about primarily
because thought has developed,
traditionally, in a way such
that it claims not to
be affecting anything
but just telling you
the way things are.
Therefore, people cannot
see that they are creating
a problem and then apparently
trying to solve it.
So let's take the problem
like pollution or the ecology.
The ecology is not
in itself a problem.
It works perfectly
well by itself.
It's due to us, right?
That's a problem because we
are thinking in certain way
by breaking everything
up and each person's
doing his own thing.
Now, therefore, the ecological
problem is due to thought,
right?
But thought thinks it
is a problem out there
and I must solve it.
Now that doesn't make sense
because simultaneously thought
is doing all the activities
which make the problem
and then does another
set of activities to try
to overcome it.
You see, it doesn't
stop doing the things
which are making the ecological
problem or the national problem
or whatever the problem is.
>> Buddhists believe the
oneself as the creator.
So the future, be good or bad,
entirely depend on present,
or how you say, shoulder.
It entirely does depend on
our own present behavior
or present action.
So you see, in order to
change the external thing,
first must change
within ourself.
If we want something like this,
if you want a beautiful garden,
first in human mind it say
make some kind of blueprint
or the imagination or vision.
And then, according to that
idea, then you see implement.
Then the external
things will materialize.
>> The Dalai Lama saying
visualize first and then it
will materialize, almost as if
it's saying that all of reality
comes forth from our mind,
not the other way around.
Very interesting.
Now let's take a look at
the fact that a lot of us
are quite different.
We lead different lives, we
come from different backgrounds.
We're, in a sense,
handed different hands
in the poker game of life.
And sometimes these
hands are great,
sometimes the hand
is not so great,
but I implore you to take a look
at it like Randy Pausch says.
He says, "We cannot change
the cards that we are dealt,
just how we play that hand."
And this is true.
There's many ways we can use
the gifts that we are given,
instead of saying
woe is me, I haven't
been given enough
of an opportunity
to arrive at my full potential.
It's very easy to get wrapped
into this, this looking
at the bad side
of life but if it
seems too difficult to
see the good side of life,
I'll just leave you with a
quote that Jimmy Buffett says.
"It takes no more time to
see the good side of life
than it takes to see the bad."
So it's truly all
about what we choose
to do with our attention.
It's our choice.
It really is all in our hands.
So here's what I implore
you to look deeper into.
If you ever heard of the
Bodhisattva or the Path
of the Bodhisattva,
the Bodhisattva
was the one that could have just
rested in eternity in Nirvana,
complete bliss, having found
all the answers, away from all
the suffering of the world.
But the Bodhisattva
is not in Nirvana.
The Bodhisattva is the one that
arrives at that beautiful gift
of peace and inner equanimity
but enters back into the fray,
back into the suffering,
simply to help those who are
suffering, those who cannot see
into the future and are afraid
about what it might bring them.
Be the Bodhisattva.
Be there, of service,
for other people.
Now let's take one more look
at these ancient traditions
on an episode of
With Regina Meredith,
and this episode is called "Alex
Gay on the Art of Humanity."
>> If we want to stay around
for another thousand years
and excel as a species, I think
that we're at that troubled
time of adolescence, not
quite in our 20s yet,
as a species where consumption
and addiction to oil
and a variety of other things
is, there's no moral center,
it doesn't seem to, our actions,
to the way that we treat
nature.
We don't see our
connectedness with everyone
and with everything.
We're sitting here
with our broadband
and the technological
advances that
are astonishing and
truly important to making
the global consciousness dawn.
We have to find ways of
flying under the radar of sort
of corporate media that
have their own agenda
and look toward the agenda
of what would bring the most
benefit to the most people
and the most beings on Earth.
And as I was saying,
that naturally
starts to dawn in people
when they look inside
and find a source of
wisdom and compassion
that's been the
sort of mystic core
that is seen through the
various wisdom traditions.
>> Art can change the world.
It can change millions of minds.
Truthfully, going back to
one of the biggest catalysts
in my life, that set me off into
the direction that I'm on now
is the conspiracy
documentary film generation,
starting around 2006, 2007.
Films like Zeitgeist,
Loose Change, Thrive.
These films reached millions
upon millions of people
and they changed
millions of minds.
It woke me up, it truly did.
It showed me that there
is so much about the world
that I just was not aware of.
As soon as I woke up to that
alarm clock of these conspiracy
documentaries, I needed
to move into something
like human potential
because, truly,
what is the best
solution we can bring
to a world that seems quite
grim and quite dangerous
other than the best kinds
of us that we can bring
to the moment, the
best kinds of solutions
we could come up with?
And how would we be able
to do that if we were not
in our full potential?
But I will say this in thanks
to all the conspiracy theorists
out there.
They're not afraid to
express their minds.
They're not afraid
to express things
that will get them
ridiculed because they
believe we need to hear it
and that we need to wake up.
Also, if even just a fraction
of what they're saying
has any truth to
it, you might want
to know about it because
it would transform
the way you look at the world.
Our life, the way
we express ourselves
to ourselves and the world
around us, is our masterpiece
but you have to put in the time.
You have to learn about the
world that you're involved in.
You have to really care
about the evolution of what's
happening on this planet.
And if you think it's too hard,
if you think you're not there
yet, just listen to what
the social psychologist Amy
Cuddy said.
"Don't fake it till you make it.
Fake it till you become it."
Like Mahatma Gandhi
said, "Be the change
you wish to see in the world.
Don't just write about
it, scream about it, yell
into a megaphone to the masses.
Become that change.
Be what you wish to
see in the world."
So here's my challenge for you.
I'd like you to choose
one meal and this meal
is going to be your
magic ritual meal.
Try and make it one
that is not bothered
by a bunch of other people or a
bunch of other things going on.
Find a quiet space, take this
one meal, sit down with it,
arrange the plate beautifully.
And the reason why
you want to do this
is because we also
eat with our eyes.
We find beauty in the way
our plates can be arranged.
But it also turns this
plate into a magic sigil,
a symbol that represents
the very thing that we
are working on.
So in this meal,
before you take a bite,
just sit and appreciate this
sigil, the beautiful look
of the plate, the way you've
arranged all the food,
how tasty it's going
to be, and then dig in.
Appreciate every
bite, every taste.
Take your time, put the fork
down while you're chewing.
Take your time with it.
And the entire time,
all you have to do
is bring in your intention.
Your intention
could be anything.
If you're sick and you want to
heal, bring that intention in.
If you believe the world
needs some real inner healing
and you want to bring that to
them but you don't know how,
bring that intention in.
Remember that all the
answers exist within you.
It just takes the artist
mind to bring it out.
So I implore you to bring
this gift, this beautiful gift
that you're engaging in
this week, into the world
and orchestrate some kind
of goodness on this planet.
Thank you guys so
much for joining me
on this episode of "Limitless."
I'll see you next time around.
[MUSIC PLAYING]